interval. No better feeling than the
game of snooker.
game of snooker. You know you’re in
the next round.
the next round. There will be no
wild celebrations. His nickname is
Gentlemen
GentlemenJoe Perry. Just like his
Gentlemen joe Perry. just like his
dad was
Gentlemenjoe Perry. Just like his
dad was watching
GentlemenJoe Perry. Just like his
dad was watching here this evening.
He would be very proud of his son’s
performance here.
Very well played. Very entertaining
match. joe
match. Joe Perry is going to go all
match. joe Perry is going to go all
the way. You
match. Joe Perry is going to go all
the way. You have to say, he wins it
quite comfortably six frames to
three. When you’re on the practice
three. when you’re on the practice
table, you pot
three. When you’re on the practice
table, you pot balls, it only
crosses your mind about missing the
black but after you miss a couple of
easy ones that is all you can think
easy ones that is all you ran think
about and
easy ones that is all you can think
about and out there, you know when
you miss you get a big gust from the
crowd and it’s quite a horrible
experience. You don’t want that to
keep repeating time after time. It
is acting on your confidence. I
is acting on your confidence. Ijust
try to get into that mode of leading
“P
up to this event and practising it
on my own and feeling good about
things and just trying to stay in
the moment, just not inking about
negative things. A great win for
negative things. A great win forJoe
negative things. A great win for joe
Perry, a very
negative things. A great win forJoe
Perry, 3 very composed finish in the
Perry, a very composed finish in the
end. He
Perry, 3 very composed finish in the
end. He will
Perry, a very composed finish in the
end. He will play
Perry, 3 very composed finish in the
end. He will play either the
defending champion
defending championjohn Trump or
defending champion john Tmmp or
Shaun
defending championjohn Trump or
Shaun Murphy. We are back at one
o’clock this afternoon with Neil
Robertson taking on Stephen Maguire.
We will catch you then.
I am an angel, you are a demon.
We’re on opposite sides!
We’re on OUR side.
The Antichrist has been mislaid.
We have to work together.
A straight battle between heaven
and hell. Tonight, it begins.
I don’t even like you. You do!
Aaagh! We’re doomed.
It’s the first time, I’d say, in my
life that I’ve worn the same thing
that everybody else is wearing but
still felt horrendously embarrassed.
It was at that point that the
session very much got away from me.
But they were nice.
They were very friendly.
Tonight, we are in Oxford.
Welcome to Question Time.
On tonight’s panel, Brandon Lewis,
the Government’s Security Minister
and deputy for exiting the EU
and no—deal preparations.
Labour’s Shadow Treasury Minister
and a candidate in the race to be
leader of the Labour Party,
Clive Lewis.
Anne McElvoy, senior editor at
the Economist, and broadcaster.
Miatta Fahnbulleh, economist
and chief executive of
the left—of—centre think—tank,
New Economics Foundation.
And author, military historian
and former editor in chief of
the Daily Telegraph, Max Hastings.
Welcome to our panel,
to our audience at home
and all of you here.
You can argue along in the usual way
using the hashtag on Facebook,
Twitter and Instagram. It’s a new
year, let’s kick off with our first
question from Rosie Parry. Is Harry
and Meghan’s decision to step back
as senior royals petulant
and ill—judged?
Right, that was a comment in
the Times, petty and ill—judged, in
their editorial today. Megxit, as it
has been dubbed now, inevitably.
Clive Lewis, where do you stand?
No, it isn’t. First of all I would
say about Meghan Markle, she has
been a breath of fresh air for our
monarchy. She has been a role model,
inspirational, herwork with
charities, in particular with the
victims of Grenfell, has been
outstanding. I think the way she has
been treated by our media is
little short of disgraceful.
In what in particular?
I think Prince Harry himself
has said himself that he
thinks there is a large degree
of racism in terms of
how she has been treated.
It has been quite appalling.
He pointed to what
happened in South Africa with the
tour and the royal correspondents
reporting, and he also said
something about the fact that
sometimes what is being said is
so far from the truth,
but because it has come
from royal correspondents, it has
been repeated around the world.
Anybody in the public eye in
this country knows that happens far
too often in our media. He said
royal correspondents’ reporting
would get misreported. It would get
misreported, but they were basing it
on what was said by those
royal correspondents.
Let’s be clear and frank here,
I think it’s up to them in the 21st
century, if they wish to step back
from their royal duties. I think,
given what it has done to them,
given the pressure and stress,
if you have ever been in
the public eye and the eye
of a media storm, let’s not forget
that Prince Harry’s mother was
harassed severely, Princess Diana,
by the media. He has seen this
before and it has had a massive
impact on his life
and now it is happening to his wife.
He has every right, and she has
every right, to step back from
public life and do as they see fit.
I also think as well, Meghan Markle
is one of the most privileged people
in this country. And yet, look at
what our media is doing to her
and Prince Harry.
It is completely unacceptable.
I think they have every right
to make the decision they have.
Is itjust the media that
is making them do this? Looking
through their website today, they
explained their reasoning, in some
detail, they want to live
a different kind of life as well.
Yes, they do,
but we have to take into account
that this probably wouldn’t happen,
and it is speculation on my part,
but this probably wouldn’t
have happened if there hadn’t been
such a negative coverage
from the British media.
This is the same British media that
is meant to be the fourth estate,
meant to hold power and the public
to account. It is meant to be fair
and balanced. It is anything but.
I think what you can see in the way
she has been treated as a member of
the royal family is little short of
a disgrace, as far as I am
concerned, and I think they have
every right to do what
they have done.
As for the issue of
warning Her Majesty about this,
I personally feel that’s
a family matter between them.
I understand Her Majesty might be
upset about that,
but ultimately, it’s a family matter
and I don’t think I would want
to delve into that.
Max? I agree with about half
of what Clive said.
I think Meghan Markle and Prince
Harry deserve tremendous sympathy,
because it is hell being royal, it
is incredibly difficult being royal.
I don’t buy the view that it is
all racist. You mentioned Diana.
I was a newspaper editor
at the time that Diana was in
the eye of the storm.
An awful lot of royals have had
a very bad time, you can argue,
from the media, without the issue
of race being brought into it.
The question, Max, is was their
decision petulant and ill—judged?
I also feel very sorry for the Queen
in all this. She is in her 905 and
now facing more of these family
storms. I think one of the problems
that... perhaps cos she has lived to
such a great age, nobody has got to
grips with the issue of what is
the royal family supposed to be.
The idea... Prince Charles
is dead right to talk about
a slimmed—down royal family,
in which the state is not
expected to pay 2.4 million for
Prince Harry’s house, in which there
is a clear understanding of what is
and isn’t expected of lesser royals.
We are all arguing all the time and
I think they are the victims of this
in some degree, because nobody has
told them explicitlyjust what is
and is not expected of them, so they
deserve sympathy, but Prince
Charles, William and the Queen
deserve sympathy in all this.
But I hope they will keep talking.
There is obviously a hell of
a row going on
in that family and the worst
thing that could happen
is if they end up non—speakers.
They’ve got to keep talking
and see a way through this.
One hopes it will be a happy one,
not only for Meghan and Prince
Harry, but also for the Queen and
the future of the monarchy, which
some of us care passionately about.
The man in the check shirt.
Would their financial...
their seeking financial
independence not have been better
before the multi—million—pound
renovation of Frogmore Cottage?
Yes, they are talking about living
financially independently.
Let’s just take another question
at the front. With the sweater. ..
I am perfectly happy to see them
live their own life, do whatever
they want. They are humans,
like we all are.
But shouldn’t they immediately stop
taking public money
as they step down?
Instead of, I think they said today,
"move towards that".
Yes, they have said they will work
to become financially independent.
Who pays for the royals? Certainly,
in terms of security, that comes
underyouraegis, Brandon. Yes. Are
you happy, if they step back from
their role as senior members of the
royalfamily, will you keep paying
for their security?
I’m sure you are not surprised that
I can’t comment on the security...
You are Security Minister.
It’s inappropriate for me to comment
on security issues for any
protected person, royalfamily
or otherwise protected.
Surely you can tell us whether you
would be happy to keep funding it?
No, all protection for the royal
family is done on a risk—assessed
basis, independently. It does come
within my remit, but it would be
inappropriate for me to comment on
how we arrange, and what we do for
security for protected people.
What I would say, and I think this
is where there is an element of
agreement between Clive and Max and
myself, I agree with what Clive
pointed out at the beginning. Harry
and Meghan, and the royalfamily
generally, do amazing work for the
country and particularly for charity
and good causes. We are very lucky,
and I’m proud to be in a country
that has a royal family like that.
But Max is also right, this is
a matterfor the royalfamily, and
I hope we end up in a position where
the royal family get a result that
is good for them
and good for the country.
One thing we have seen through
the history of our country
is the royal family has evolved
over the centuries and over the
generations, to reflect the country,
and I am sure we’ll continue to
see that, but this is a matter for
the royal family. Can you see
a situation where Harry and Meghan
live independently but are still
part of the royal family?
Some would see that
as a contradiction in terms.
Can you see that working?
We will have to wait and see
exactly what the royal family
want to do and where they will go
with this. I think it’s
difficult to prejudge what they
might do. We should also be clear
that the royal family is notjust
funded through the public purse.
They have funding through the family
itself and their own interests.
Anne, I saw you shaking
your head in some frustration
when Clive was talking.
A little bit. Let me with
the position of the Sussexes.
It depends on whether their aim
is still to be
in the royal family or not.
They said they don’t want
to be senior royals,
but that is a somewhat
different question.
They say they want to continue
to collaborate with the Queen
and support royal charities.
It’s not picking off some menu.
That’s the slight problem.
You have a model of the royal
family, and I do think
a slimmed—down royal family
is where we need to head.
I think Prince Charles
was right about that.
That is now happening by necessity,
not by choice.
The question is then,
what is the role of those who,
if you like, are in the outer core?
They are an attractive couple who
have brought a breath of fresh air
to the royalfamily. I interviewed
Meghan Markle, in a panel of other
people, last year. Ifound her very
engaging, professional to work with,
I liked her focus on subjects like
girls’ education worldwide.
I liked the fact she had an
international dynamic to what she
brought to it. But you can do a lot
of that from a different platform.
If you want to stay
somehow connected
to the royalfamily, being a
semi—demi—royal, with a bit of time
at Frogmore Cottage, and a lot of it
in North America, is going to
be very difficult to pull off.
It will need to be very strategic.
Max Hastings said rightly that
it needs to be done by agreement.
It can’t be done by an exchange
of hostile communications,
as we have had in the last day
or so.
So, something’s gone badly wrong.
It may be salvageable, but it does
needs thinking through.
The reason I disagree with Clive...
We talk about the media and poor
coverage — yes, it must be very
bruising to get coverage
you don’t like —
sometimes, that even happens
to politicians.
MAX: Can I mention...
Max, what I was about to say, I
think most coverage, including the
broadcasters, is very, very positive
in the UK. We often don’t report
a lot of things people say when
they don’t like the royals.
I think you have to
calibrate it
and they have to roll with that,
if they want to still be
connected to the firm.
One short, brutal point about money.
One issue that will face
the Sussexes if they do step down,
they will find an awful lot of
people, especially in North America,
who want to give them money,
but they are absolutely
the worst sort of people,
and probably most of them,
they should not be taking
money from. And this issue...
You mean in terms
of commercial endorsements?
Whether it’s lending them yachts,
all the people who are most eager
to hang around royals
are almost, ipso facto, the people
who the royals shouldn’t be
hanging around with.
How they overcome that problem
will be very difficult for them.
Miatta, one thing that occurs to me,
this idea of growing
financial independence.
We have seen that before, thinking
of the Count and Countess of Wessex,
with the TV production company,
the PR company,
and in the end, the Queen
ended up giving them money
so they wouldn’t do that any longer.
Can you see that working?
I think you can see it working.
It’s a question of imagination
and will.
At the end of the day,
for me, I have
a lot of sympathy for Harry and
Meghan. I think they have been given
a really rough ride. You just have
to look at some of the coverage
overnight around their decision,
which has been really vile
and excessive,
to see that actually, it’s been
hugely unfair. I think, in part,
it’s because Meghan doesn’t conform
to what people, some people, expect
a royal should look like and act
like, and so she has been given
a really tough time. I think
it’s wrong and really sad.
And so, I think,
they are a young family,
they have literallyjust had
a baby, that’s pretty tough
in its own right. They are under
a huge amount of pressure and
they have been really honest about
how unhappy they are, about
mental health issues they are
struggling with, and they have had
a break and decided,
"We want to change things.
"We want to focus on ourselves and
our kid." And I think they are
completely right, and I say
fair play to that.
But I do think it shines a spotlight
yet again on the royal family,
on the monarchy, and I think that
the monarchy, who are
part of our culture, our tradition,
our history, but it needs to be
reformed and it needs to be brought
back into the 21st century.
For me, that means
both constitutional reform, so we
are no longer a nation of subjects,
but a nation of citizens, through to
the fact it needs to be scaled down
so there are less royals,
and the fact that we have this
very privileged and very
wealthy family that should be
financially independent, but also,
actually, wealth that they have
accumulated through centuries,
that they have inherited,
they should be giving some of it
back to the public, because
in the end, it belongs to us.
Three hands up in the front.
Yes, the woman in the cardigan
first, then I’ll come to you, sir.
Isn’t the truth of the matter that
everybody now looks on the monarchy
as a bargain, and unless we get
our pound of flesh from the press,
and in terms of how much money
they bring into the country,
nobody actually believes that
that family should be allowed
to rule the country as right?
We all look at it as a
transactional arrangement now.
And do you think we are
wrong to do that?
No... Well, in a way, Ithink
we are wrong,
but also, the transaction
is in terms of,
how many stories will they
give to the press?
The press turned on Meghan
when she stopped providing so many
photo opportunities for the baby.
Very quickly, they turned on her.
I think we like to see a soap opera,
we like to be provided with
entertainment, and if we don’t get
that entertainment, the country only
is governed by our agreement, and we
feel we have to get value from them
as entertainment, as well as money
being brought into the country.
The royal family have provided
acres of coverage,
in the last couple of months
in particular.
Yes, the man in the yellow shirt.
I’m inclined to agree
with Max, actually.
My sympathy goes to Her Majesty.
In the last year, she had to put up
with what happened
to Prince Andrew, and...
That can’t have been a good day...
It’s a tough time for her.
2019 has been a very tough time.
And her husband was in hospital.
And now this breaking news
about her grandson.
I think what Harry should have done,
he should have come back from his
holiday, from America and Canada,
taken his time,
perhaps gone to the Queen...
He did go to Her Majesty
when he decided
to marry Meghan. He did ask her
and she gave consent.
What he should have done is gone to
Windsor Castle or Buckingham Palace,
had a chat with his grandmother
and then discussed
what his intentions were,
so that all the protocol
could be followed
and then he could have had
a press release.
But he pre-empted and went and gave
There are reports tonight,
I cannot verify one way or
the other, that the Queen was aware
to some extent of what was going
to be announced today.
We just don’t know, do we?
I do agree with Clive,
the British media have literally
tortured them. He is frightened.
He has seen what his mum went
through and he doesn’t want his wife
to go through that. So he’s made
that decision, which I think is
too pre—empted and too early.
The man here in the cap.
Yes, I admire them
for having the courage to come out
and say what they have said
and what they wish for.
I have adult children with families,
and if I started to try
to tell them what to do,
I think I would be out of order.
And they would, also.
And also, the question of Frogmore,
if they didn’t occupy that, perhaps
they would give it to the homeless.
Right, fair enough. Can Ijust ask,
out of interest,
is there anyone
in the audience who thinks
that Harry and Meghan
have done the wrong thing?
Not a single hand up.
That’s really interesting. I had no
idea how this conversation would go.
That’s very interesting indeed.
OK, I am going to move on
to another subject, if I may.
Eric Eimerson.
Yes? Has the assassination of
Qasem Soleimani, on the orders of
President Trump, made the world
a safer or a more dangerous place?
Of course,
we have the reports tonight,
we had the Canadian Prime
Minister, who was talking
just before we came on air,
confirming US reports that...
Well, they believe they have
the information —
Brandon, you ran fill us in
on this -
that the Ukrainian
passenger jet that was downed
just hours after the missiles
went into the US air bases,
following the assassination
of Soleimani,
that this jet was downed
by the Iranians by mistake.
We can’t verify that,
but perhaps you ran tell us more?
Er, yes.
Well, Justin Trudeau’s
made an announcement
as we came on air
and what we believe has happened,
what the Canadians have outlined,
is it looks like the plane
was brought down by
an surface—to—air missile.
We believe it was... Have you
seen intelligence to that effect?
We believe it was unintentional.
I’m not going to...
I’ve just outlined what...
At some point,
I’m going to ask you a question
you can actually answer!
Have you seen intelligence
to that effect?
Yes or no? So I’ve just watched
Justin Trudeau outline the position.
But can you answer that question?
I’m not going to talk about
the intelligence, obviously.
0K, all right. Fair enough.
It would be inappropriate.
But what I can say is we do believe
the pointJustin Trudeau
has outlined,
which is that a surface—to—air
missile has hit that plane.
We believe it was unintentional.
We do... We’ll be working
with our Canadian colleagues,
and the Prime Minister’s spoken to
our partners around the world,
including in the EU, with
President Macron and Angela Merkel,
supporting them
in the work they’re doing
to ensure that we get
a full investigation
to get to the bottom
of what has actually happened
and how it came about.
And obviously our thoughts go out to
all the family and friends of people
who have been affected by
such a tragic loss of life.
It’s beyond words, to consider
what people are going through
in that situation,
to make sure there is proper
and respectful repatriation
of the remains of people
to their home countries
and to their friends and families.
And do you think...
Coming back to Eric’s question.
Ijust wanted to fill us in, Eric,
forgive me,
given that this just happened
before we came on air.
Do you think the killing
of Qasem Soleimani
has made the world a safer
or more dangerous place?
Well, I think the reality is,
particularly in
that part of the world...
We have challenges
in parts the world,
and that is a part of the world that
has been and is a dangerous place.
We all want to see
a de—escalation of this situation.
Globally, it is in
nobody’s interests
to see anything other
than de—escalation.
We will be... As I say,
we want to work with our partners
around making sure there’s
a good and proper investigation.
We’re working with partners
around the world
to make sure we do everything we ran
to play our part
in seeing that de—escalation.
The Prime Minister spoke to Rouhani
just this morning as well.
But is it more dangerous now,
do you think?
I think we’re going to have to see
what happens over the next few days,
but this is a dangerous part
of the world,
and we are in dangerous times.
That’s why it’s important
that everybody is working together
to see a de—escalation
of this situation.
That’s what’s in the best interests
of all countries involved. Miatta?
Yes, it has made it more dangerous.
And, yes... Of course it has.
Look, Soleimani
clearly terrorised people
in his own country and beyond.
He clearly took action that was
destabilising in the region,
but none of that excuses the action
of the President
of the United States.
You know, what Trump has done is the
thing that neither Bush or Obama...
Theirjudgment was
it was the wrong thing to do,
to try to take out Soleimani,
because it would be highly risky
that it would escalate things
and it would destabilise the region.
And, you know,
you can’t help but feel
that this is yet another example
of Trump being cavalier,
reckless, thoughtless and impulsive,
and it’s put all of us in danger,
and critically, it’s put people
in the Middle East in danger.
And for me, you know, the scenes
of people in the streets in Iran
gives you the sense of the kind of
depth of feeling and anger,
particularly against the backdrop
of, like, really crippling sanctions
that the US has imposed on Iran,
that means that there’s
food shortages in the country,
medical shortages in the country.
The IMF said that last year,
the Iranian economy shrunk by 9.5%.
So people are angry and,
you know, Trump has done thejob
of uniting the Iranian people
against America.
So it’s hugely dangerous. Not least
because, you know, for me,
I can’t see
what the end goal is for him,
I can’t see what the strategy is,
and I don’t think there is one.
So I think for the UK Government,
you’ve got to play this
and not hug the United States
closely on this.
And, you know,
some of the kind of rhetoric
that’s come from the Government —
"We understand where
they’re coming from.
"We’re on the same page as them" —
I think is a mistake.
Because, you know, if you want
to play the role you say you do,
of de—escalating,
if you want to play the role
of trying to broker dialogue,
then the UK has to be seen
and has to be strong
and independent of the US,
and be willing to tell our closest
allies when they’re being reckless,
that they ARE being reckless
and putting at risk hundreds of
thousands of men, women and children
in the Middle East, as well as
potentially people at home.
Just very briefly, Brandon,
as I’ve got you here,
I’ll put you on the spot —
do you think it was reckless?
I think the Americans have an
absolute right to defend themselves.
We don’t know exactly what
the information was they had.
They made a decision.
I know this is the Government line
that’s come out,
but do you think it was reckless?
The reality is, this is a man who...
It doesn’t excuse it.
You know, we don’t mourn his loss,
but has been involved himself
in a huge amount of loss of life
in that part of the world.
And I think it is right
that we respect the fact
that the United States has the right
to defend themselves,
but our aim and our purpose is to
see a de—escalation in that region.
Yes, the woman here in the front.
Surely you wouldn’t have to worry
about changing... or de—escalating
if we didn’t have a rogue president
going around doing these things
so recklessly,
and just coming back to
the narrative around this,
whilst I’m not going to dispute
the wrongs that Soleimani did,
he was also one of the leaders that
led the rebellions against Isis.
So I think there’s a question mark
over just the recklessness
with which this
has been carried out.
0K. The woman at the back,
in the red top.
My understanding is BorisJohnson
made this decision
without informing you...
Oh, sorry, my apologies —
that Donald Trump made this decision
without informing you,
or BorisJohnson or Dominic Raab,
that you were cut out of the loop
in terms of this
major political change.
So the British response has been
closer to the French and German one,
to the point that we are criticised
by Mike Pompeo
for not being as helpful
as we could be.
It seems that we are
much closer aligned
with France and Germany
and the EU response —
how is this going to change
how you move forward
in terms of making Brexit happen
when one of our
close trading partners
that we hope for in the future —
the Americans —
seem to be cutting us out of the
loop of major political decisions?
I’ll come back to you on that
in a moment, if I may, Brandon.
Just there’s a lot of hands up.
Yes, the man in the brown sweater?
So I think you briefly touched on
Britain’s role,
so my kind of question
I’d be interested in hearing
to tie in with all this is,
what do you see Britain’s role in
the Middle East is going forward?
What is your opinion
of our position?
0K. And this man in another
brown sweater. Back there, yes.
Would it help or hinder
the situation
if we follow Donald Trump’s advice
and withdraw from
the Iran nuclear agreement?
0K. Brandon, there’s a few things
you will need to answer.
I’m going to go around the rest
of the panel first, if I may?
(live. I think if you’re going
to have...
..a society, a state
and an international community
that’s going to live by the rule
of international law,
especially the laws
that you yourself
have played a big part in writing,
then you need to stick by them.
And it looks to me that
at the moment,
on the evidence
that hasn’t been supplied,
this looks to me very much that this
is not abiding by international law.
It’s actually looking very much
like a state—level assassination.
APPLAUSE
And can I ask you, given that you
saw active service in Afghanistan,
what’s your view in terms of —
coming back to Eric’s question —
this killing making the world
a safer or more dangerous place?
Well, I think you only have to...
I think if you spoke to the families
and friends of the victims
of that disaster that happened
to the aircraft,
then I think you will
already have your answer.
I don’t think we have to wait
and see, as Brandon says —
we already have our answer.
The world is a more dangerous place
as a result of this.
Let’s not forget, we’ve had
our own share of intervention
in this part of the world,
in the Middle East.
I know it’s Persia,
but this neck of the woods,
and Iraq, which is
the next—door neighbour.
I think if you look at the people
in Iraq and Iran,
I was seeing thousands of people
on the street,
pleading with their government,
pleading with Iran,
pleading with the United States,
and after 20 years of war,
of destabilisation, of hundreds
of thousands of people dead,
in which our country
has played a part in the past,
along with the US and our allies,
I think now to start to escalate
again and risk the threat of war...
Which is something,
if you’ve seen it up close,
you would never wish on anyone.
There are generations in Iraq
who have been completely wiped out
by what’s happened there.
And I think for Donald Trump
to act the way he has,
to bring the Wild West
to the Middle East,
then I think, ultimately,
we have a rogue president
who is destabilising, I think,
global and international relations
in an area which is
extremely dangerous,
just before he’s about to be
impeached, just before an election.
It’s cynical, it looks wrong.
And where is the Government?
On the first political test
of foreign policy
since they won the general election,
and are now taking us
out of the European Union,
they have fallen
at the first hurdle.
Because ultimately,
what is happening here...
We expected to see the British
Government and Boris Johnson
come out and stand up
for the rule of law,
and he has failed. We haven’t
even seen him in Parliament —
he’s still on the private island
of Mustique, as far as I know,
texting his responses.
It’s completely unacceptable.
Other than, obviously,
being at Prime Minister’s Questions?
Well, I know. Thought I’d get a
little joke in there about Mustique.
Well, just in case anyone
took you literally! Max?
The question I ask,
what would we be saying if President
Putin had used a Russian drone
to take out a Western client
in this way?
I think opinion would be deeply...
APPLAUSE
I wouldn’t use the rhetoric
that Clive has used,
but I don’t disagree
with the fundamental.
Yes, it has made the world
a more dangerous place.
There is no...
I read American media every day
and I haven’t seen,
anywhere in the American media,
any suggestion there is any strategy
or any policy behind this.
This was just a lunge
by the President,
and where I totally agree
with Miatta and with Clive —
I don’t think you can expect
a British Prime Minister
to make anything other than
sympathetic or respectful noises
to the United States
in the House of Commons,
as BorisJohnson did yesterday.
But I think it will be a key test,
if we get a new escalation
of the Iran situation,
which is highly likely
in the months ahead,
and if President Trump seems
determined to pursue this course,
I think it is vital
BorisJohnson displays the courage
to say that we will have no part of
direct military action against Iran.
And I think that will be
a vital test for this government.
We’ve seen enough. We are all deeply
scorched about the memory of 2003,
everything that is happening
in Iraq today derived from that,
and any suggestion
that we should now get involved
in direct military action,
just to keep the...
First of all, the Americans...
So many British Prime Ministers
since 1941
have done things in hopes of payback
from the Americans.
We have a good working relationship
with the United States
on many issues,
but there is never any payback
for our support for them.
But again and again,
we’ve been weak enough to support
mistaken American
foreign policy initiatives
and we’ve got absolutely nothing
out of it,
and this is a good moment
to say, "No more."
APPLAUSE
Anne?
I’m just slightly staggered
to find that Max Hastings has turned
into a sort ofJeremy Corbyn!
No—one more surprised
than Max, I suspect.
LAUGHTER
Well, that speech could have come
from that direction.
The one thing I think
is a bit missing so far,
so I’m going to focus in on it —
everyone sort of gave the General
Soleimani and the Iranian position
a bit of a free pass.
I think it’s very hard,
because President Trump
makes it very hard to say,
"Here is someone we ran rely on
to keep us safe."
That was the question.
Yes, we know he’s reckless.
Yes, we know that it is hard to find
a strategic way through
Donald Trump’s thinking.
But our interests, America’s
interests, the West’s interests
also will go on
long after Donald Trump.
And one of the things I think
we’ve gone past rather fast
is we would need some response
to what had become a spiral of
aggression across the Middle East
from Iran, sponsored by the likes of
General Soleimani,
and very largely by him.
This was not something
that started...
I think the lady
in front mentioned Iraq.
It goes back way before Iraq —
it goes back to 1979
and the aftermath of that,
and a strong Islamist Shia push
to make "many Irans",
as I think the rhetoric is
from that quarter in Tehran.
I’ve been very pleased to see
that the response...
There are other forces in Tehran
who I think want to balance it out.
But I don’t think it was just going
to go on without any response.
Clive goes the legal route —
it’s a perfectly decent
and correct question,
but it’s not the only question
in international affairs.
It’s not the only question if you
want to keep your own country safe
and keep a global order,
which is incredibly difficult
and changeable and risky.
And it is like that
with and without Donald Trump.
What I’d like to see,
of course, from us,
seeing as we’re sitting here
in Britain...
You asked what the British response
would be.
I can tell you,
from my personal knowledge,
that many senior Americans,
including some in uniform,
are as appalled
by the President’s handling
of foreign policy
and military affairs as we are.
I don’t dispute that
for a moment, Max.
There was a very senior American
who telephoned
a very senior British official,
just after he left
the Trump administration.
He was one of the most senior former
members of the Trump administration,
And he told his British friend,
"I owe you this call
because we work closely together,
"and I want to tell you
that you should be in no doubt,
"however many state visits you do,
"however often you have Trump
to Buckingham Palace,
"this this American government
does not do allies,
"it does not do partners.
"Expect nothing
from this administration."
And this is where we are.
Well, I don’t think
you’re right about that.
I think you pursue...
You ask... Very good questions from
the audience — what should we do?
We pursue de—escalation,
we stay close to our more robust
European allies,
who I think also know there is also
a major problem about Iran,
there is not only a major problem
with Donald Trump.
And no, you don’t get involved
in anything like...
You know, we’ve talked about
a military intervention,
side—saddled with the US.
No, I would not support that either.
You calibrate your response.
But you don’tjust go around saying,
"This is another example of a mad US
president doing another mad thing."
It’s not enough,
and it won’t see you through
the next few difficult years
and the really difficult choices
that lie ahead of us.
0K. There’s a lot of people sitting
patiently with their hands up.
Yes, the woman
in the blue scarf there.
Yes, I agree with Anne,
because I think that we might be
misleading ourselves
to say that Trump
isjust a rogue president
when, in fact, he probably has
quite a bit of backing in the US.
There are quite a few Americans
who really support his actions.
I’m not as well—connected
as Max, obviously,
but I think it strikes me
that we often like to look
at the people who support us
and say, "Oh, they disagree
and he’s rogue,"
but, in fact, is he rogue?
Is he not accepting advice?
I don’t agree
with his actions myself,
but I think we might
mislead ourselves
to continue to call him this rogue
president acting on his own.
Brandon, let’s come back to you,
cos there were a number of points
raised that only you can answer,
and one in particular about
Britain’s relationship with America,
and how much Britain calibrates
its support of actions like this
in the hope of getting a trade deal,
or whatever it might be.
And then of course we heard what
Max had to say,
which is, you know,
that’s for the birds.
Well, look, turning
to the lady’s point...
I can’t remember if it was
the lady or one of the gentlemen
that made the point about
the Iran nuclear agreement.
Our position is, as I said,
this is a...
You know, we do live
in dangerous times,
this is a dangerous part
of the world —
that’s why we want to see
de—escalation,
we want to see the parties
fulfilling that nuclear agreement —
the Iranian deal,
as it’s commonly called.
In terms of the lady’s point
specifically about our partners,
I think this is actually...
And I have to say, if we were going
to get onto Brexit,
I didn’t expect to do it
in the context of THIS question.
You never know what’s going to
happen on Question Time! Absolutely.
On a serious note,
I think this is actually a...
What you have outlined
is a very good example of the point
that I think is quite important
to remember —
that we are leaving the EU,
we are not leaving Europe.
We want to be an important partner
and friend with countries
that we work closely with.
The Prime Minister,
as I said earlier on,
has spoken to President Macron
and to Angela Merkel,
the Chancellor, already.
We want to work with them,
playing our part in de—escalating
this, and that response.
That doesn’t preclude us
from doing a very good trade deal,
either with them as part of the EU,
or with our friends and partners
in the United States.
The special relationship
between our countries
has always gone well beyond
a relationship
between a prime minister
and a president.
It’s a relationship built
on security and history as well.
and I do believe, actually,
that we can do a trade deal
with the United States.
And I know that they are. ..
Donald Trump has thrown some
cold water over that,
saying the withdrawal agreement
at the moment
is precluding a trade deal
with America.
I have talked to people
in Washington
with the Trade Department recently.
Liz Truss, the Secretary of State,
has spoken to her counterparts
regularly and recently and they are
keen to do a trade deal with us
and I think that’s in
the best interests
of the economy of both
our countries,
as well as doing a trade deal with
friends and partners in the EU.
I don’t think one precludes
the other.
We want to see both happen. 0K.
We have a number of other
questions to get through.
Before I move on, I want to
tell you that next week
we will be in Liverpool
and the week after that
we are in Stoke Newington
in north—east London.
If you want to be in the audience,
you ran all us
or go to the Question Time website
and follow the instructions
and join the conversation.
Let’s move on to Rochelle Silva.
Should the Labour Party
make a clean breakfrom Corbynism?
APPLAUSE
Clive Lewis, I will come to you
in a minute. I’ll start with Miatta.
0K!
Look, I don’t think you can
experience a defeat
of the size the Labour Party did
in December
and not change, and not do things
differently,
and just continue doing what
you are doing and hope for the best.
So, I think the labour Party needs
to reach out,
notjust to its
traditional heartlands,
but beyond that and speak to people.
To understand why people
moved away from it —
in this election, but also
in the last three or four elections,
because this is a longer term
problem for the Labour Party.
And based on that, decide what
the change looks like.
The thing I would say,
I think one of the things
Labour got right
was to say, to look at the country,
look at the scale of some of
the challenges we face —
so the climate emergency,
the fact our economy is not working
for everyone.
We have had a decade where living
standards have been squeezed,
so people today are no better off
than they were ten years ago.
That is unprecedented
in modern times.
To see the crisis in our public
services and say enough is enough.
We need to do something different.
We need ambitious, bold policies
to transform the economy.
My plea to all the leadership
contenders is,
don’t retreat from that ground.
The job is to deliver an ambitious
prospectus for change,
but a clear plan,
and to convince the country you have
a plan to deliver that.
I think in doing that... But have
you answered the question, Miatta?
Should the Labour Party
make a clean breakfrom Corbynism?
I’m not sure what your answer is.
I don’t really know what
Corbynism is, quite frankly.
What I think what they need to do
is develop an ambitious prospectus,
but learn some of the lessons.
So what did we see in this election?
The manifesto was overloaded,
they promised too much.
Within it, they crammed in 310—15
year programme of government
into five years, and people did not
believe it could be delivered.
They tried to do everything
through national government,
and there was a big gap in
the manifesto around devolution
and a radical plan to push power
out of Westminster and Whitehall.
Because you only deliver change
if you give people power and control
to make that change happen in the
places where they live and work.
Instead of talking about socialism,
which, quite frankly, for a lot of
people out there,
it doesn’t mean anything, set out
a vision for the type of country
you are trying to create.
Set out a vision that says,
"We don’t think we should have
an economy
"where the minority of people
do disproportionately better,
"and huge swathes of people
are left behind,"
you know, an economy where
one in three of our children
are living in poverty,
one in which we don’t protect
our environment,
and you say instead,
"Let’s club together,
"let’s provide services that will
look after us when we are
"ill and old, like our NHS,
"that will look after
and educate our children."
But didn’t millions of voters
reject a Marxist prospectus?
Well, I don’t believe it was
a Marxist prospectus.
At no point in the election
did we talk about the country
or economy we wanted.
We talked about getting Brexit done,
the NHS and trade deals.
I think there was a job absolutely
to respond to some of
the challenges the country faces,
but you have to do it in terms
people care about,
that they understand
and relate to their life,
and that’s what the Labour Party
needs to do.
Most of my life...
APPLAUSE
Most of my life I have been
a left of centre Tory,
a Ken Clarke, Michael Heseltine
type Tory -
but I voted for Tony Blair
in ‘97 and 2002,
and I only turned away
from the Labour Party
when he went mad and invaded Iraq.
In that sense I am the sort of voter
whom a lot of people in
the Labour Party don’t went back,
because you don’t see
any place for us.
50 millions of us are
disenfranchised
out there in the middle of politics.
Tony Blair was a pretty good Prime
Minister until he invaded Iraq,
and he did a lot of good things
for Britain.
If we get another Labour leader
remotely resembling —
and who, for me, means Keir Starmer,
I, for one, will vote for him.
APPLAUSE
The man in the dark suit.
I happen to agree
with what Max has just said.
Miatta, reality is,
Labour lost because they had
a totally unelectable leader,
a front bench that was just
not good enough
and a manifesto that
lacked credibility.
The sooner the party
understands that
and recognises that by winning three
general elections from the centre,
that’s how you win power
and then do things you want to do,
you will never get back in.
It will be ten years before we get
near a Labour government again.
APPLAUSE
Is that what you will try to do,
(live?
I noticed after Rebecca Long—Bailey
gave Jeremy Corbyn
ten out of ten,
you gave him six out of ten.
Which is still pretty high,
given it was the worst Labour defeat
since 1935.
Is Corbynism finished,
as far as you are concerned?
Would you go more to the centre,
as the man suggested?
The key thing to understand about
the centre of British politics
is that the centre
of politics shifts.
One of the thingsJeremy Corbyn
and the last Labour leadership
got right was that they understood,
although they may not
have been able to deliver it,
is that there is a large number
of people in this country
who are ashamed at the levels
of inequality in the country,
notjust in terms of income,
but also wealth,
and there are people
deeply concerned
about issues like
the impending climate crisis,
for which we have a government
who are missing in action.
There are things here where we will
find consensus across this country,
with people like Max,
where we understand
we need to make some radical changes
to how this country,
how our economy operates, because
we are facing an existential crisis,
notjust from the climate,
but also of democracy.
I think if you want to
understand why Labour lost,
there are seeds of truth
in what people said tonight.
How do you win someone
like Max back?
Winning someone like Max back, you
have to put forward a prospectus
which actually say, and the Labour
Party does... He’s right here.
You can pitch to him now.
I want... Let’s get you back, Max.
I want Max’s vote
for the Labour Party
because ultimately, unless
the Labour Party can appeal
to the centre ground
of British politics,
then you are right, it can’t win.
But the centre ground
changes and shifts.
So if we are talking about
democratising the economy
and giving ourselves a sense of
ownership and agency in our lives,
and these are not things that are
necessarily just socialist,
these are things we all want
in our lives.
If we we nt to have a world
our children can inherit,
where they can breathe clean air,
where we have a national
health care system
where you don’t have 4.4 million
people on the waiting list,
these are things where the centre
ground of British politics is there.
That’s not a mad socialist
perspective,
and it’s the job of the Labour Party
to be able to represent that
in a way that is cooperative and
a way in which people can buy into.
Now, I understand what has happened
in some of the seats we lost —
I would say that has been 40 years
in the making.
If you look at the number
of votes we have lost,
millions of votes over the last
40 years.
We as a party did so many good
things between 1997 and 2010,
but we also need to understand
we got some things wrong.
If we want to reach out back
to those communities
and also hold on to the seats
we have got and build some more,
we have to understand
that the Labour Party
will not be dictating to people
in the 2lst century,
it has to talk about the language
of collaboration.
That’s why I have been talking
about the fact
that if this is to be
a five year project,
we have to start talking
about collaborating
with other political parties
and movements.
The world isn’t going to wait...
Is that because you think you can’t
be popular enough on your own? No.
I’ll tell you why.
Ultimately, if you look at what’s
happened to Scotland, for example,
80% of the seats there
are controlled by the SNP.
My constituents can’t wait
for a ten year project
to come back into power.
It has to be in five.
Why is the SNP is so powerful?
Because politicians in Westminster
have not been listening
to the Scottish people.
That’s what’s been happening.
We have to listen
to the Scottish people.
If that means we have to work with
the SNP to get rid of the Tories
and bring in radical constitutional
reform in this country
so that we have a voting system
fit for purpose,
where we have a democracy where
Zac Goldsmith loses his seat one day
when the electorate don’t want him
and ends up back in the samejob
a week later
when BorisJohnson appoints him —
that’s wrong, and it’s not
a democracy I want to live in.
APPLAUSE
Lots of hands up.
The woman in the green sweater
in the back.
People seem to think Meghan Markle
was harassed and hounded
by the press —
that wasn’t a millionth of a scratch
of the relentless campaign
aboutJeremy Corbyn
from the moment he stood
and was leader of the Labour Party,
by a right wing press
owned by multimillionaires,
billionaire people,
most of whom are tax exiles,
who don’t even live in this country.
And the truth is, I think
you can argue all you want
about who is the leader
of the Labour Party,
anyone standing for socialism
will receive the same thing,
and combined with the techniques
used by Cambridge Analytica,
will not stand a chance —
they will not let a socialist
be elected in this country.
0K. The man in the tie, there.
I think the fact we are having
this conversation again —
with the leadership election
afterJeremy Corbyn
was elected the first time,
you talk about collaboration,
I have seen no collaboration
within the Labour Party,
and the fact you guys couldn’t get
together throughout the last decade
has really caused a place where we
haven’t had a strong opposition
in this country for some time.
What I ask of the Labour Party is,
can you unite together now
going forward and become
that strong opposition?
The woman with the glasses.
I believe, to get democracy
really right,
we have to get rid of
the first past the post system
we have at the moment.
The Labour Party didn’t do
half as bad as everybody says,
in terms of votes.
It was just in terms of seats.
I find that incredibly unfair,
that the Conservative Party
has such a massive majority
on only like 43% of the votes.
APPLAUSE
Let’s hear more from the audience —
the woman on the edge, there,
in the sweater.
Ijust wanted to know —
this is for Clive —
if you really think it was
a failure of policy
or a failure of leadership,
and what you would potentially bring
to the Labour leadership role?
Reasonably briefly, because I’ve
given you quite a big shout here.
I think it’s possible
to say it was both.
In terms of the policies,
Miatta touched on it,
it was one of the most
radical manifestos.
If I took any individual item,
I would say there was
a good argument
for most of those policies in there,
but if you will drop such a radical
manifesto onto the electorate
over a six—week period, you will
have problems, and we did.
There were issues of leadership —
the issue of anti—Semitism
was an issue,
and people don’t think strong
leadership was shown on that.
And also on Brexit,
whichever way wejumped,
we should have jumped
one way or the other.
In the end, we ended up with our
feet going in opposite directions.
There are seeds of truth
in all those arguments,
but ultimately, if we want to
bring this party back together,
I will come to the point the lady
mentioned just then,
we have to think about
how we will collaborate with others.
The Conservative Party did this,
they did a deal with
the Brexit Party.
What did we do? We didn’t do a deal
with the Greens,
the Liberal Democrats and others,
and we paid the price for that.
Anne.
APPLAUSE
I come from the North East, the
newly Tory North East of England.
I have several grandparents
revolving in their graves.
That’s a good example —
there’s a part of the country,
particularly the constituencies
near where I’m from,
North West Durham,
the Bishop Aucklands, etc,
where these were never supposed to
leave the grip of the Labour Party —
and they did.
While I think Clive
is absolutely right,
and he is more open
than many of his colleagues
about what went wrong, I think
the analysis is fundamentally flawed
that says, "We offered too much,
it was all too good,"
and these voters in these parts
of the country
where I never expected, growing up,
to see the Conservative Party
winning seats,
it was always a dry run
for Conservatives,
and they scuttled back down to,
ooh, I don’t know, Oxfordshire,
it was a huge change
in the political landscape.
To say, "Well, we can get round it
by doing some deals
"or trying to advocate for changes
to the electoral system,"
they may be good things,
some of them, in their own right,
but I don’t think they are
anywhere near the answer
to the scale of the defeat
you suffered. I think they are.
When you start to say... I know
you do, but I disagree with you!
That’s why we’re here, right?
When you say, Jeremy Corbyn,
you gave him six out of ten,
Rebecca Long—Bailey
gave him ten out of ten,
and a bit of a laugh for that —
my goodness, how many seats,
in parts of the country
that had never voted Tory
in living memory,
would you have to lose
before you would say, actually,
this was closer
to nought out of ten?
That is the real position
the Labour Party is in,
and it will only come back from that
when it faces up to it
and works out that if
it is not forward looking,
if it cannot support a vision
for enterprise, for innovation,
as well as for the things
that you hold dear —
equality, poverty alleviation —
and I respect you
very much for that,
and I think the right of centre
has learnt a lot from that.
The trouble is,
they have learned from it —
you have not learnt
from the other end of the spectrum,
and that is why you were smashed,
and you need to think hard and fast
about how you come back from it.
Brandon, we know who the nominees
are, Clive is one of them.
Who do you fear the most?
Well, taking that point,
and Rochelle’s original question,
I am somewhat [oath
to give advice to Labour,
and Clive and his colleagues,
on how they come back —
but there is a couple of
key points to think about.
Today has been a good example
of Labour’s problem.
The reality is, the British public
voted in a referendum,
we had a clear result
in the general election
where nobody doubts that the key
issues in that general election
were people’s concern about Corbyn —
I spent a lot of time in the
Midlands and the North of England —
and wanted to see the Government
deliver on a democratic decision
and get Brexit done. What happened
today in the vote on Brexit?
Labour and Clive voted
against it again.
What we are seeing is
a group of people standing
to lead the Labour Party who just
weeks ago were telling the country
that Corbyn was the answer
to their problems.
Suddenly now they think
they are the fresh start.
I just don’t think that works
for Labour.
0K.
APPMUSE
We haven’t got that much time left,
I just want to get
one question which...
a number of people put
this forward, actually.
Let’s hear from Jo Gearing.
Jo, where are you?
Yes.
Are special advisers
a threat to democracy?
So, who are you thinking
about there, Jo?
Dominic Cummings comes to mind.
0K, and what’s making you think
that in particular?
Obviously he’s the special adviser
to Borisjohnson.
Yeah. Well, I’m concerned
about the disdain for the processes
of Westminster and Whitehall,
and the power he wields
in masterminding the proroguing
of Parliament
and refusing to appear before a
select committee that Parliament...
Yes. Some time ago, that was. Yeah.
He’s a bit of a mystery,
Dominic Cummings.
He put out this job ad
calling for wild cards
and super—talented weirdos.
For a personal assistant,
he’s a bit of a mystery.
50, Brandon, you know the man well.
I thought the job advert
was a good thing to do.
Anybody who applies for that will go
through the proper process,
but we want to hear from
notjust the normal people,
we want people to get
involved in politics
and be involved in government.
I have worked with special advisers,
I have a special adviser,
they play an important...
always have done.
Go back to the Labour years,
or through ours,
special advisers do play
an important part,
working with the Civil Service,
with ministers
and giving a political input.
They are important.
We are very lucky in this country.
I’m sure, if you talk to some of
the Labour ministers of the past,
they will say the same,
we have some very smart people
who are not elected politicians
but have something to contribute
and are able to play
an important part.
I have seen Dominic Cummings
in action.
I think he is someone who is really
powerful at opening up new ideas,
driving things forward and asking
questions and challenging things,
as special advisers are meant to do,
and ministers are there to do.
It is for ministers to appear
in front of a select committee,
as we do, and we get grilled
for that.
I think special advisers play
an important part in politics.
I was pleased to see that kind of
advert that’s saying to people,
"If you don’t come from
the kind of background
"that you think normally has a job
to do in Westminster,
"don’t let that stop you.
"If you’ve got something to say,
if you’ve got something interesting,
"come and apply,
and be part of something
"that could be quite exciting
and interesting,
"because you’ve always
got something to say."
When you say
"exciting and interesting" —
it did also say, "It will involve
lots of uninteresting trivia
"that makes my life easier,
which you won’t enjoy."
Well, he is making that point
that it is hard work.
You are really selling this job!
It is really hard work,
and special advisers,
part of theirjob is to make sure
we are challenging policy
and make sure we have got policy
that can deliver for people
across the country.
There is a hard grind to that,
but we are going into
an exciting time for our country
and people have the chance
to be a part of it.
Being more serious about it,
which is what you’re referring to,
have special advisers, "spads", as
they’re known, become too powerful?
My first reaction with Dominic
Cummings’ remark about weirdos —
we should restrict the weirdos to
the benches of the House of Commons.
I think we need...
CLIVE: That’s a bit much!
Clive has taken some offence
at that. It’s probably true.
We need serious
career administrators.
The Civil Service is not perfect,
and there is plenty of scope
for improvement —
but the idea the Civil Service
should be...
One of the problems, the
Civil Service has become demoralised
by the cult of special advisers,
that too manyjobs are being given
to unelected people
simply by arbitrary decisions
of ministers.
I think we need to boost
the Civil Service
and restore the morale and faith
in the Civil Service as a career.
I certainly don’t think
if Dominic Cummings
is going to be any sort of exemplar
of who will run this country,
I would sooner stick with
Sir Humphrey.
I think Sir Humphrey was afar
better person to run Britain
than Dominic Cummings.
I would just say... Briefly.
Really briefly.
To be very clear, these two things
are not mutually exclusive.
I think the Civil Service
in this country is phenomenal.
Having good special advisers
working with the Civil Service
is what delivers for our country —
with ministers.
Anne. It shows you’re
getting on a bit
when you remember
the New Labour special adviser,
one of whom said there were
17 people who run the country,
and exactly the same sort
of question
as the lady in the audience put
was being asked —
I think special advisers
and civil servants,
they are a ying and yang,
perhaps even more a relationship,
sometimes, of dogs and lamp posts —
they don’t always get along.
I think the sort of
Dominic Cummings, disruption,
we had it in the Cameron era
with Steve Hilton,
they were always incredibly
badly dressed and quite difficult,
but I think they do
shake up the system, Max.
As much as I admire
the Sir Humphreys,
and if she’s female, Sir Henrietta -
Lady Henrietta -
you do need this sort of shock
to the system sometimes.
I don’t mind that Dominic Cummings
wants to bring in different people
and have different kinds of roles
and a bit more challenge
to the system.
Our politics is changing,
and we need to bring different
people into the heart of it.
The only thing that rankled with me
is if say that you want
super—talented weirdos
and that they should think
outside the box,
and then say, "Oh, by the way,
if you don’t get along with us,
"we will bin you within a month,"
I thought, well, you do then
have to acknowledge
that there is a bit of
a contradiction there,
and the system has
to allow for people
to feel free to speak their minds
in government
and not feel they have to be
part of, how shall I put it...
a sort of Boris cult.
Would you be looking
forsuperweirdos, Clive?
There’s probably enough of them
in Parliament already,
as Max was saying.
So, Ifind Dominic Cummings —
does he undermined democracy?
He’s like a Rasputin—type character.
You kind of feel,
"If only the Tsar knew!"
But actually I think BorisJohnson
and the Government are quite happy,
because he isn’t accountable,
and he can do all of these things,
and he can be the bullet magnet
which takes the ﬂak —
but actually, what this comes down
to is a lack of accountability
of our government and the executive,
of which he is a functionary.
I think what it comes down to,
really, when you analyse it,
is that Dominic Cummings
ultimately wields power
because he is allowed to by the
executive and by the Prime Minister.
Until you can hold
the Prime Minister accountable
in a far better way,
and the executive,
then I am afraid to say people
like Dominic Cummings
will always be seen as these
characters who wield this power —
but actually, he doesn’t.
He has the power
because BorisJohnson and
the executive give him that power.
Miatta? Having been both a civil
servant and a special adviser,
there is clearly a role for both,
and it is important for
how government functions.
I do, however, think that Dominic
Cummins is a bit renegade —
that’s his brand, that’s what
he does, he goes in, he disrupts,
you know, he’s difficult
to work with.
He does things
that are uncontroversial,
does things that shake up
the system...
That are controversial,
not uncontroversial.
That are controversial, and does
things that shake up the system
and I think creating some change
and pace in the Civil Service
is a good thing.
The appetite to do that is...
But there are ways to do it.
If he wants to wage a war
against the very Civil Service
the Government needs to deliver
its free trade agreement,
to deliver any of the change
they claim they want to make
in the country, you cannot go
trashing and destroying
the Civil Service,
who have done a phenomenaljob
against a difficult
political background.
You were a special adviser —
what would you say the top attribute
of a top spad should be?
Be humble, be smart, listen
and work with your colleagues —
unfortunately, I don’t think
he always does these things.
Humble sped! I can’t get
Dead Ringers out of my head,
which is that he’s the undead
Jonathan Harker.
Which I find quite amusing!
But that’s in my own personal...
Well, I’m afraid we are out of time,
much as we could go on
talking about special advisers,
Dominic Cummings and others.
Next week we are in Liverpool
and the following week, we will be
in Stoke Newington in London.
So callus if you would like
to be in the audience,
or go to the Question Time website —
you can follow
the instructions there.
You can have this conversation
on Radio 5 Live
on Question Time Extra Time
with Adrian Childs and guests,
and that is starting now.
But for now, thank you to my panel,
to the audience for coming along
and to you at home
for listening and watching.
From Oxford, bye—bye.
Will I be big enough for big school?
You will be, yeah!
Is it supposed to taste like... ?
Yes. It is.
What’s wrong with the telly?
MAN CHUCKLES
It’s not even on!
What does this even do?
Why doesn’t he like me?
How fast is this?
Really fast!
What have I missed? Where’s my other
shoe? What are we having? Lasagne!
Dad!
(“an I get hair extensions?
No. No.
What is this?!
ALL: Where’s my charger?
Why do we have day and night?
You can’t have all the answers,
and for the times you don’t...
Where’s the laptop?
..there’s BBC Bitesize,
the online learning resource
for primary starters, exam takers
and everything in—between.
All this week, we’ve been in the
Cardiff area, where these five
inquisitive locals have been allowed
to judge some superb homes
that are the pride and joy
of their owners.
Wow!
They’ve beenjudging how functional
the homes are...
Wow! Look at that storage!
I can live here!
..the ambition of the interior
design...
Oh, it’s a chandelier
in the bathroom. I love it!
..and finally that X—factor.
Ah, look at this!
Now we’re talking.
The element of surprise.
A bit of a shock. You don’t
expect this in a farmhouse.
After much scrutinising...
I like that they haven’t ripped
that up and put a seamless floor in.
..these localjudges
selected four finalists.
A modernised Edwardian terrace,
with sleek styling, hidden trinkets
and warm pink overtones.
Feels feminine. At the same time,
it’s got a nice structure to it.
Our wild card winner — a rigorously
renovated 19th—century bathhouse,
with luxury spoils
and contemporary character.
I love the frameless glass
entrance as you come in,
so it’s all
about the architecture.
A rustic three—bed semidetached
that blends textures and materials
with sustainability at its core.
What a surprise! Look at that!
What theatre!
0h! Marvellous!
And finally, a detached Georgian
cottage with cosy nooks and rural
views beneath a kaleidoscope
of colours.
They really go for it with
a wide range of vibrant colours.
The colours are unexpected.
Today, these five local interlopers
face their final and most